King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals
Civil & Environmental Engineering Department
CE 341 – Statics
Second Semester 2025-2026 (Term - 252)
Version 1 – Update on January 20, 2026
Instructor: Dr. Fahad Alqahtani
Office: Building 3 – Room 207
Office Hours: Via the link posted in blackboard
Contacts: E-mail: fahadfardan@kfupm.edu.sa
Course (Catalog) Description
Catalog course description:
Transportation system in Saudi Arabia; transportation planning and evaluation; vehicle
characteristics; human factors; geometric design of highways and intersections; the basis of
pavement design; introduction to capacity analysis of highways and intersections; introduction
to airport planning and design; application of transportation‐related software.
Textbook: Garber, N. J., & Hoel, L. A. (2020). Traffic and highway engineering. Cengage.
Grade Distribution:
Component Weight
Major Exam 1 20%
Major Exam 2 20%
Final Exam 20%
Quizzes 15%
Mini case studies 15%
Final presentation 5%
Participation and attendance 5%
Total 100%
1

Notes:
General
• The information provided in this syllabus outlines the course plan at the beginning of
the semester and is tentative. It is subject to change based on instructional needs and
discussions that may arise during the semester.
Quizzes
• All quizzes carry equal weight.
• Quizzes will be conducted in class.
Examinations
• The two major exams and the final exam are coordinated between all sections, and
dates will be announced in advance.
• No make-up exams will be allowed.
Final presentation
• A final presentation is required from students at the end of the semester (last two
weeks) about different topics provided by the instructor.
Mini-case studies
• Mini case studies will be conducted in class.
• Students are expected to work in groups assigned by the course instructor in class.
• Students are required to submit the results of their work either in class or after class
based on the case study instructions.
Attendance and Participation
• University regulations regarding attendance will be strictly enforced.
• More than nine (9) unexcused absences will result in a DN grade.
• Attendance penalties:
o 1 point will be deducted for each class missed.
o Two late arrivals will be counted as one absence.
• Students are expected to be attentive and engaged throughout the lecture. This
includes:
o Paying attention to the instructor and material presented.
o Raising their hand before asking questions.
o Actively asking and answering questions when called upon.
o Participating constructively in discussions.
• The use of phones or any distracting electronic devices is strictly prohibited during
class and will negatively impact the participation grade.
• Audio or video recording of lectures is strictly prohibited without prior written
permission from the course professor. Any unauthorized recording will be reported
and dealt with in accordance with applicable university regulations and relevant Saudi
laws, including the Anti-Cyber Crime Law, where applicable.
2

